1 -  What is a Firewall and why is it used ?

A firewall is a network security device that prevents unauthorized access to a network. It inspects incoming and outgoing traffic using a set of security rules to identify and block threats.

A firewall can be physical hardware, digital software, software as a service (SaaS) or a virtual private cloud.

Firewalls are used in both personal and enterprise settings, and many devices, including Mac, Windows and Linux computers, come with a built-in firewall.

Firewalls serve as the first line of defense against external threats, such as hackers and malware attacks. In particular, firewalls combined with an intrusion prevention system (IPS) are crucial in preventing malware and certain application layer attacks.

Firewalls first emerged in the early days of the internet when networks needed new security methods that could handle increasing complexity. They've since become the foundation of network security in the client-server model -- the central architecture of modern computing.

Overall, firewalls play an important role in preventing cyber attacks, protecting sensitive data, and maintaining the privacy and security of computer systems and networks.

A firewall establishes a border between an external network and the network it guards. It's inserted inline across a network connection and inspects all packets entering and leaving the guarded network. As it inspects, it uses a set of preconfigured rules to distinguish between benign and malicious traffic or packets.

The term packet refers to a piece of data that is formatted for internet transfer. Packets contain the data itself and information about the data, such as where it came from. Firewalls can use this packet information to determine whether a given packet abides by the rule set. If it doesn't, the packet is barred from entering the guarded network.

Rule sets can be based on several things indicated by packet data, including source, destination and content.

These characteristics can be represented differently at different levels of the network. As a packet travels through the network, it's reformatted several times to tell the protocol where to send it. Different types of firewalls exist to read packets at different network  .

2 - What is the difference between VA(Vulnerability Assignment) andPT(Penetration Testing)?

The key difference between vulnerability assessment and penetration testing is that vulnerability assessments search for potential weak points in your security, while penetration testing identifies weaknesses and then attempts to exploit them. There is often confusion between vulnerability scanning and penetration testing, which is easy to understand, since vulnerability testing is essentially an early step in the more-comprehensive penetration test.

3 - What is the difference between HIDS and NIDS ?

Differences between HIDS & NIDS

A -  Focus & scope:

Host-based Intrusion Detection System [HIDS] focuses on monitoring & protecting individual hosts or devices within a network.
Network-based Intrusion Detection System [NIDS] concentrates on monitoring network traffic to identify suspicious patterns & potential threats across the entire network.

B - Location & data collection:

HIDS is installed on individual hosts, gathering data directly from the host’s log files, OS activity & system calls.
NIDS is deployed at a strategic point in the network, monitoring incoming & outgoing traffic, analysing packets & network headers for anomalies.

C - Detection techniques:

HIDS primarily employs signature-based detection, comparing patterns against a database of known attack signatures.
NIDS utilises both signature-based & anomaly-based detection, identifying deviations from normal network behaviour.

D - Resource utilisation & scalability:

HIDS can be resource-intensive on individual hosts, potentially affecting their performance.
NIDS centralises monitoring, making it more scalable & reducing the impact on individual hosts.

4 - Explain SSL Encryption

SSL, or Secure Sockets Layer, is an encryption-based Internet security protocol. It was first developed by Netscape in 1995 for the purpose of ensuring privacy, authentication, and data integrity in Internet communications. SSL is the predecessor to the modern TLS encryption used today.

A website that implements SSL/TLS has "HTTPS" in its URL instead of "HTTP."

In order to provide a high degree of privacy, SSL encrypts data that is transmitted across the web. This means that anyone who tries to intercept this data will only see a garbled mix of characters that is nearly impossible to decrypt.

SSL initiates an authentication process called a handshake between two communicating devices to ensure that both devices are really who they claim to be.

SSL also digitally signs data in order to provide data integrity, verifying that the data is not tampered with before reaching its intended recipient.

There have been several iterations of SSL, each more secure than the last. In 1999 SSL was updated to become TLS
